# Django Rusty Templates

Django Rusty Templates is an experimental reimplementation of Django's templating language in Rust.

## Goals

* 100% compatibility of rendered output.
* Error reporting that is at least as useful as Django's errors.
* Improved performance over Django's pure Python implementation.

## Installation

Django Rusty Templates is not yet ready for full release, so it is not available on PyPI yet. Instead it can be installed from github or from a local clone:

```sh
$ pip install git+https://github.com/LilyFoote/django-rusty-templates.git
```

```sh

$ git clone git@github.com:LilyFoote/django-rusty-templates.git
$ pip install ./django-rusty-templates
```

You will need a rust compiler installed (https://rustup.rs/).

## Usage

Add an entry to your [`TEMPLATES` setting](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/5.1/ref/settings/#std-setting-TEMPLATES) with `"BACKEND"` set to `"django_rusty_templates.RustyTemplates"`:

```python
TEMPLATES = [
    {
        "BACKEND": "django_rusty_templates.RustyTemplates",
        ... # Other configuration options
    },
]
```

## Contributing

Django Rusty Templates is open to contributions. These can come in many forms:

* Implementing missing features, such as filters and tags built into Django.
* Reporting bugs where Django Rusty Templates gives the wrong result.
* Adding new test cases to ensure Django Rusty Templates behaves the same as Django.
* Adding benchmarks to track performance.
* Refactoring for readability or performance.

### Getting started with development

To develop locally, first create a virtualenv using your preferred method.

```bash
$ python -m venv .venv
```

Activate the virtualenv and install the requirements:

```bash
$ source .venv/bin/activate
$ pip install -r requirements.txt
```

To run the Python tests, build Django Rusty Templates in develop mode with maturin and then run pytest:

```bash
$ maturin develop
$ pytest
```

You can also run the Rust tests:

```bash
$ cargo test
```

If you get an `ImportError` from python, you may need to set the `PYTHONPATH` environment variable:

```bash
export PYTHONPATH=/path/to/venv/lib/python3.x/site-packages
```

When submitting a PR we check coverage. You can check coverage locally with

```bash
$ cargo llvm-cov
# generate html
$ cargo llvm-cov --html
# open it
$ open -a <your_browser> target/llvm-cov/html/index.html
```

Note this only checks the coverage generated by the Rust tests. We also measure coverage generated by the Python tests in CI, which means missing coverage locally isn't always an issue.
